### Tip 18 (Extended Exposition)

["Truncating the fast (but risky) way"](https://github.com/loverajoel/jstips/blob/gh-pages/_posts/en/2016-01-18-rounding-the-fast-way.md) talks about the `~~` (double bitwise NOT) trick as a (probably) faster alternative to `Math.trunc()`, both in the typing and in the execution.

But the `~` (bitwise NOT) operator, which is the basis of `~~`, exposes a dangerous hidden corner of JavaScript: **Not all numbers are created equal.**

#### 64 to 53 to 32: Downgrading Expectations

Let's begin with a fact that many developers forget: JavaScript has **only one number type**. Every integer and decimal number you encounter in your work is stored as a _double-precision (64-bit) IEEE 754 floating-point number_, no exceptions. You can visit [this Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double-precision_floating-point_format) for the gory details, or [Annotated ES5 Section 8.5](https://es5.github.io/x8.html#x8.5) for a quick summary. That said, 18,437,736,874,454,810,624 (18.5 quintillion) possible values ought to be enough for anybody.

Except only integers from -(2^53-1) to (2^53-1) can be guaranteed _exact representation_ in this format. In ES6, these limits are enshrined as constants:
```js
Number.MIN_SAFE_INTEGER  // -> -(2^53-1)
Number.MAX_SAFE_INTEGER  // ->  (2^53-1)
```
Pre-ES6 implementations will have to explicitly use `-(Math.pow(2,53)-1)` and `Math.pow(2,53)-1`.

"But _gromgit_," you say, "I do integer math **way** bigger than that, and they sure look right!"

On the contrary:
```js
   Number.MAX_SAFE_INTEGER
=>  9007199254740991
   Number.MIN_SAFE_INTEGER
=> -9007199254740991
   Number.MAX_SAFE_INTEGER - Number.MIN_SAFE_INTEGER + 1
=> 18014398509481984
```
Try the above in any browser you care to, going back as far as you want. If you haven't spotted the problem yet, it's this: **odd + odd + odd = even?!?!**

You can blame the inexactness of large floating-point number representation for this. Still, 18,014,398,509,481,983 (18 quadrillion) exact integers ain't bad.

Except the more experienced among us remember hardware-supported bitwise shortcut operations from our years in the programming trenches. Sure enough, JavaScript imports stuff like `<<` (bitwise right shift) and `>>` (bitwise right shift) for quick multiplication and division by powers of two, bit-twiddling with `&` and `|` and of course `~`, that sort of thing. Fast, predictable...and every single one [defined over 32 bits](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Bitwise_Operators).

So if I had a 2TB cloud storage allocation, and wanted to double it:
```js
alloc = 2000000000  // I hate it when storage vendors shortchange me 8-)
alloc << 1          // -> -294967296  (wait, I **owe** them space?!?!)
alloc * 2           // -> 4000000000  (oh, ok. phew!)
```

### What Madness Is This?!?!

It's called **engineering**.

Back in the day, a young fellow named Brendan Eich had [_ten days_](http://www.computer.org/csdl/mags/co/2012/02/mco2012020007.pdf) to come up with a new language to embed in the then-new Netscape Navigator browser. (I used it, way back then, and it was pretty much the only browser game in town, so yeah, it was good-by-default.) It was a rush job, to put it kindly, but as with many developments in computer history, it was "fit to purpose", so everyone chose to ignore this 64-53-32 disparity. Perhaps addressing this inelegance was tabled at standards-forming time, but it's likely that no one was fiddling with gargantuan numbers in JavaScript, so "good enough for web browsing" won the day.

In Brendan's own [colorful recollection](https://www.jwz.org/blog/2010/10/every-day-i-learn-something-new-and-stupid/#comment-1021):
> [...] bignums were not in the cards. JS had to "look like Java" only less so, be Java's dumb kid brother or boy-hostage sidekick. Plus, I had to be done in ten days or something worse than JS would have happened.

And so here we are today, stuck with:
> double by default, int under the hood, and bitwise ops are 32-bit int (uint if you use >>>). I blame Java.

Perhaps ES10 may arrive in an age where even 64-bit is considered "barely functional", and move swiftly to correct this oversight with 128-bit bitwise operators. Better yet, proper arithmetic and bit-level support of [bignums](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arbitrary-precision_arithmetic) will banish this horrible reality into legend. Until then, remember:
```
we're stuck with 64-bit floats
and int-53 just gets my goat
but bang some bits and you will see
large nums deflate to -3
     -- gromgit
```
